---
title: "CS140-lecture-20210830"
# date: 2021-08-30T13:20:50-07:00
draft: false
bookToc: true
tags: ["syllabus", "proof"]
---

# Course orientation

## Syllabus

{{< hint info >}}
File: [*140-syllabus.pdf*](/notes/140-syllabus.pdf) 
{{< /hint >}}

## Notes during orientation

- Regular quizzes
- 2 exams
- Modules has prerecorded lectures
- Homework assignments not graded
- Can watch videos during Zoom meeting, or prior
- Generally 1 quiz per lecture (calendar at end of syllabus), given at the first class after the last day of the lecture
- Turn in work as single PDF file

## Methods of proof

{{< hint info >}}
File: [*140-methods_of_proof.pdf*](/notes/140-methods_of_proof.pdf) 
{{< /hint >}}

Recap on methods of proof.

### Direct method

A method we use to prove a statement directly.
If we want to prove "if {{<k>}} p {{</k>}} then {{<k>}} q {{</k>}}", we try to prove it directly by assuming if {{<k>}} p {{</k>}} is true, then {{<k>}} q {{</k>}} is true.

### Proof by Counter Example

A method we use when a general statement is stated, and we want to disprove it.
If someone says "all triangles have the same length sides", all we have to do is come up with a triangle that doesn't have the same length sides.

### Proof by Contradiction

We assume that the negation of the statement is true, so we assume that {{<k>}} p \wedge \neg q {{</k>}} is true through contradiction.

{{<k display>}}
\begin{aligned}
    p \to q \equiv \neg(p \wedge \neg q)
\end{aligned}
{{</k>}}

A contradiction is generally a false statement.

### Proof by Contrapositive

The contrapositive of {{<k>}} p \to q {{</k>}} is {{<k>}} \neg q \to \neg p {{</k>}}.

"If I wake up early, then I go to school." 
The contrapositive of this would be "if I don't go to school, I didn't wake up early."

To prove by contrapositive you try to prove {{<k>}} \neg q \to \neg p {{</k>}}.

### Proof by Mathematical Induction

More examples in document above.

> Remember, 
{{<k display>}}
\begin{aligned}
    p \to q
\end{aligned}
{{</k>}}
does NOT mean that
{{<k display>}}
\begin{aligned}
    \neg p \to \neg q
\end{aligned}
{{</k>}}



